Add "node_modules: How one character saved 50 GB of disk space" post (#1861)
mainmatter/mainmatter.com: _posts/2022-08-18-pnpm.md

---

> title: 'node_modules: How one character saved 50 GB of disk space'

Reviewer: The art of headlines ™️ 

🤯

Author: you should read the rest of the post... 😂

Reviewer: I want to! Not sure I'll find the time before vacation though…

author: 'Tobias Bieniek'
github: Turbo87
twitter: tobiasbieniek
topic: javascript

> bio: 'Senior Software Engineer'

Reviewer: With that headline, should change this to

```suggestion
bio: 'Senior Software Engineer/Online Marketer'
```

;)

description:
  'Tobias Bieniek describes a way to save many GB of disk space when working
  with JavaScript projects.'
---

Have you ever worked with JavaScript? Have you been annoyed by the three hundred
copies of [left-pad] in all of the `node_modules` folders on your disk? Would
you prefer if all of your projects shared their `node_modules` folders instead
of each getting their own copy?

If you answered these questions with "Hell, yeah!" then this blog post is for
you!

<!--break-->

## The status quo

Let's start by getting an understanding of why things are the way they are.
[Chesterton] would be proud…

Back in the days when computers were first created there were no package
managers. There weren't even packages. Things were just being copied around and
nobody had heard of "versions" yet.

At some point a few clever developers thought that it might be nice to share
reusable pieces of code across applications and thus "packages" were born. One
major downside of the early package infrastructure was that packages were shared
across the operating system. That means, if you have two applications and both

> need a particular, but different version of a package you're essentially

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
need a particular, but different, version of a package, you're essentially
```

Reviewer 2: Commas galore! Maybe something like "That means, you're essentially screwed if you have two applications that both have the same package, but different versions." could work here to reduce the commas needed

screwed.

> Believe it or not, this is basically how everything in the Python and Ruby world
> works. These days there are ways to work around this and have an "environment"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Believe it or not, this is basically how everything in the Python and Ruby worlds
work. These days there are ways to work around this and have an "environment"
```

(with its packages) per project, but it is still quite hard to have multiple
versions of the same package within such an environment.

When [npm] came around, they realized that this sort of thing wasn't very
scalable and set out to fix this issue. Their main idea: instead of putting
packages in some operating system folder the packages would be kept directly in
the folder of each project. But also, each of the packages could also have other
packages as dependencies within it. This is how the `node_modules` folder was
born.

They formalized a rather simple [algorithm] to find the packages in the nearest
`node_modules` folder: If you call `require('chesterton')` in a file, then it
will look for a `node_modules` folder in the same folder as the file, and, if
found, will look for a `chesterton` folder inside it. If neither exists, it will
look in the _parent_ folder of the file for a `node_modules/chesterton` folder.
And if that does not exist, it will look in the _parent parent_ folder, and so
on, and so on…

> The beauty of this algorithm was that it allows us to have complicated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The beauty of this algorithm was that it allowed us to have complicated
```

dependency graphs:

```
our-app
├─ one-dependency@1.0.0
└─ another-dependency@3.0.1
   └─ one-dependency@0.4.2
```

Don't get me wrong, I'm not saying complicated dependency graphs are necessarily
a good thing, but in some cases they are hard to avoid. If necessary, I'd rather

> have two versions of the same dependency in a project, then not be able to use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
have two versions of the same dependency in a project, than not be able to use
```

the dependency at all.

Anyway, that's how we got into this mess… Now let's see how we can get back out
of it!

## Plug and maybe Play… sometimes

For years, the way npm did things was the established practice and any attempts
of changing the status quo failed. With [yarn], a new package manager was born
that challenged a lot of things in the npm ecosystem… except for the
`node_modules` structure. 😢

Well, that's not entirely correct. After years of development the yarn team

> finally came up with what they called "Plug'n'Play mode". This new mode promised

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
finally came up with what they called "Plug'n'Play mode" (or "PnP" for short). This new mode promised
```

us to share the dependencies across the whole machine while still allowing us to
have multiple versions of the same package installed. 😍

Unfortunately, this new mode had one major downside: It monkey patched the
`require()` function in Node.js, because it needed to essentially override the
`node_modules` lookup algorithm. 😫

While this worked well in small, controlled environments, it eventually became
clear that this was not a good long-term solution. There are still plenty of
tools in the npm ecosystem that don't support this mode well, or even at all.

We need a different solution!

## The shiny future

Remember the title of the blog post? One character to rule them all, one

> character to find them, … No, wait that was something different.

Reviewer 2: 😆 👍

In the `node_modules` folder of our project we have a `bar` folder which points
to the `bar` dependency of our project. But there is also a hidden `.pnpm`
folder which contains the real magic. Inside this folder are folders for every
single package/version combination that is being used in your project.

This includes our own dependency `bar` in the `bar@1.0.0` folder, but inside
this `node_module/.pnpm/bar@1.0.0` folder is not the dependency itself, but
instead just another `node_modules` folder, with another `bar` folder inside of
it, linking to the global pnpm store.

Whoa… that's complicated!

But there is a reason for this complicated folder layout. From the perspective
of the `bar` package we will need access to the `foo` dependency, and we will
need to access the correct version of it. That's why the
`node_modules/.pnpm/bar@1.0.0/node_modules/foo` folder is just a link to the
`node_modules/.pnpm/foo@1.0.0/node_modules/foo` folder, which itself links to
the global pnpm store again.

**tl;dr** the complicated folder layout ensures that every package has access to
its dependencies in the right version, but not anything else.

## Conclusion

> While pnpm has been around for quite a while, it lately started gaining more
> momentum with quite a few high profile projects migrating to it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While pnpm has been around for quite a while, it has lately started gaining more
momentum, with quite a few high profile projects migrating to it.
```

> At simplabs we have started to convert a few of our own projects to it, and let

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At Simplabs we have started to convert a few of our own projects to it, and let
```

Author: nope, it's lowercase ;)

---
title: 'node_modules: How one character saved 50 GB of disk space'
author: 'Tobias Bieniek'
github: Turbo87
twitter: tobiasbieniek
topic: javascript
bio: 'Senior Software Engineer'
description:

>   'Tobias Bieniek describes a way to save many GB of disk space when working

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  'Tobias Bieniek reveals his secret to saving many GB of disk space when working
```

Reviewer 3: I think it sounds more catchy like this, but Idk if matches you writing style :)

[Chesterton] would be proud…

Back in the days when computers were first created there were no package
managers. There weren't even packages. Things were just being copied around and
nobody had heard of "versions" yet.

At some point a few clever developers thought that it might be nice to share
reusable pieces of code across applications and thus "packages" were born. One
major downside of the early package infrastructure was that packages were shared
across the operating system. That means, if you have two applications and both
need a particular, but different, version of a package, you're essentially
screwed.

Believe it or not, this is basically how everything in the Python and Ruby
worlds work. These days there are ways to work around this and have an
"environment" (with its packages) per project, but it is still quite hard to
have multiple versions of the same package within such an environment.

When [npm] came around, they realized that this sort of thing wasn't very
scalable and set out to fix this issue. Their main idea: instead of putting
packages in some operating system folder the packages would be kept directly in

> the folder of each project. But also, each of the packages could also have other

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the folder of each project. Each of the packages could also have other
```

packages as dependencies within it. This is how the `node_modules` folder was
born.

They formalized a rather simple [algorithm] to find the packages in the nearest

> `node_modules` folder: If you call `require('chesterton')` in a file, then it

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`node_modules` folder: if you call `require('chesterton')` in a file, then it
```

will look for a `node_modules` folder in the same folder as the file, and, if

> found, will look for a `chesterton` folder inside it. If neither exists, it will

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
found, it will look for a `chesterton` folder inside it. If neither exists, it will
```

But let me explain… `pnpm` managed to fulfil the promise that `yarn` made with
its PnP mode, but without having to monkey patch anything. Instead, it is using
[hard links] in a clever way, allowing the regular `node_modules` algorithm to
work as intended, but still only having a single copy of each package version on
the disk.

Fun fact: Did you notice how "PnP mode" starts with the letters `pnpm`? 😄

Twitter user `xiaokedada` has created a nice
[overview image](https://twitter.com/xiaokedada/status/1471691763102679041) on
how pnpm creates its folder structure:

![Overview of pnpm folder structure](/assets/images/posts/2022-08-18-pnpm/pnpm-folder-structure.jpeg)

This might seem complicated at first, but it is relatively straight forward. On
the right hand side, we have the global pnpm store, that contains all the
packages and package versions that pnpm has downloaded to your machine. Each
package version only exists exactly once in this store, and the `node_modules`
folder in your projects are linking to this global store (dark red lines).

In the `node_modules` folder of our project we have a `bar` folder which points

> to the `bar` dependency of our project. But there is also a hidden `.pnpm`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to the `bar` dependency of our project. However, there is also a hidden `.pnpm`
```

Or perhaps "in addition to that" not sure "but" works here

folder which contains the real magic. Inside this folder are folders for every
single package/version combination that is being used in your project.

This includes our own dependency `bar` in the `bar@1.0.0` folder, but inside
this `node_module/.pnpm/bar@1.0.0` folder is not the dependency itself, but
instead just another `node_modules` folder, with another `bar` folder inside of
it, linking to the global pnpm store.

Whoa… that's complicated!

But there is a reason for this complicated folder layout. From the perspective
of the `bar` package we will need access to the `foo` dependency, and we will
need to access the correct version of it. That's why the
`node_modules/.pnpm/bar@1.0.0/node_modules/foo` folder is just a link to the
`node_modules/.pnpm/foo@1.0.0/node_modules/foo` folder, which itself links to
the global pnpm store again.

**tl;dr** the complicated folder layout ensures that every package has access to
its dependencies in the right version, but not anything else.

## Conclusion

While pnpm has been around for quite a while, it has lately started to gain more
momentum, with quite a few high profile projects migrating to it.

> At simplabs we have started to convert a few of our own projects to it, and let

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At Mainmatter we have started to convert a few of our own projects to it, and let
```

me tell you that the 50 GB of saved disk space are not a joke. Some of us had
dozens of individual Ember.js apps and addons installed, all using a roughly
similar dependency tree. When you get to reduce all of these duplicated
dependencies to just one copy per machine it quickly adds up.

While pnpm is certainly not without its issues either, it currently appears to
be the least bad solution in the JavaScript ecosystem. We encourage you to try

> it out and message us know if you hit any issues.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
it out and message us if you hit any issues.
```
